Hello everyone,
welcome back to Exploring Quantum Physics.
I'm Charles Clark.
Now we're going to start to use some
of the tools we've developed and
get a glimpse of how they're applied
in larger scalable calculations.
In particular, those that use some
form of the variation principle.
Now, in
the quiz at the end of the last lecture,
we looked at this function.
It's a generalized Gaussian,
exponential of quadratic form, and
you have seen the one dimensional
version of this previously.
This is the notation that I prefer
because I can remember it, and
I write it out here because it
illustrates an important thing and
that is in the Gaussian
there's a scale parameter,
which is a length scale parameter d.
And that means for
in the regions where x is much
greater than d, psi goes rapidly to zero.
So this d describes a localization domain
of the wave function and also leads
to an important observation on the
dimensional units of the wave function.
Which I offer you to
consider in the online quiz.
So the dimensional units
of the one-dimensional wave
function psi of x it's 1/the
square root of length.
I mean, I find a common misconception
among beginning students of quantum
physics that the wave functions are all
dimension less, well they are not, and
in fact that has very important
consequences for making estimates.
The wave function is a proxy for the
probability density which has the units of
inverse volume, so be aware.
And there's a problem
in the homework that,
where this aspect comes up.
Now I put a lot of emphasis
on the use of Gaussians
just because there are ways
of remembering what to do
that are very conveniently exercised
by use of Gaussian trial functions.
But secondly, they are a tremendously
powerful influence in theoretical
chemistry, that is the calculation
of molecular structure.
And this man John Pople is a person who's
awarded with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Primarily for
developing Gaussian based techniques of
the calculation of structure
of complex molecules.
And just as an example of how
influential this approach has been,
here are some citations of
articles that deal just
simply with the properties
of Gaussian basis sets, so
over 14,000 citations of this article.
And you can compare that to what at least
as of a year ago was the most sighted
paper in physics, probably still is.
The paper that articulated
the standard molecule,
there's just probably there
are many more chemists
using these type of approaches in a large
scale way then there are physicists.
Now why are these trial functions so
powerful?
The answer is the Variational Theorem,
which we're going to prove briefly.
So I'll state it this way.
And this is not a rigorous math statement,
it's kind of like a physics statement.
So if we take any Hamiltonian,
that means any Hamiltonian
with reasonable properties.
And any normalizable Eigen
function satisfies that condition.
Then this the expectation
value of the Hamiltonian,
over that wave function is greater than or
equal to the ground state
energy of the system.
And so
that means if you just have a big gun and
lots of bullets and some intelligence,
you just take a large set of functions
that you can systematically expand
and start varying into
a random walk through
function space to try to lower
the energy of the system.
And with luck, you will approach
the ground state energy that you see.
The ground state energies
are important particularly in
things like molecular structure,
in the sense that
the ground state energy of the lowest
energy electronic wave function.
If you consider the dependence of the
total energy of the system on the nuclear
coordinates, it's usually effective
to find that by minimizing
the electronic energy subject to
variations of the trial functions.
Okay, let's see how
that works in practice.
Well no, let's see how that works in, so
here's an outline of the proof
of the variational theorem.
I just theorized it, just restated
it here from the previous line.
Now, you might want to, I'm going to
go quickly from one step to the next.
But you might want to
pause the lecture and
make sure that you understand
the procedure because this is actually
emblematic of a lot of arguments
made in quantum mechanics.
So, Any,
see, I should have written
this as a psi like that.
Let us say that we know, in principle,
all the eigen functions of a Hamiltonian.
So, h hat phi and
equals en phi n.
No there exist some Heigan functions
even if we don't know them.
They form a complete set so
whatever the trial wave function is,
it can be expanded in the basis of
Heigan functions, that satisfy this.
Well then, what's the expectation
value of psi, well we
can just compute it straightforwardly
within this representation here.
So we just plug that part in.
Well let's see.
This part here is identically
equal to that, and
then this one is it's Hermitian transpose.
So this is just a straight
forward representation of how we
calculate the expectation
value of a Hamiltonian.
And so now, by construction Phi (m) H
(hat) phi (n) equals delta (n,m)
because they're Heigen functions, so
that just collapses this
two-dimensional structure into one.
And now this sum must be greater than or
equal to the same sum where,
instead of taking
the state by state energy,
we take the common,
the ground state energy,
E naught, and
then this sum is just E naught.
So, in other words, this
term, this is proven that the average
expectation value of the Hamiltonian is
greater than the ground state energy.
And in fact,
the equality sign means that if
psi h psi equals E not.
Then H psi =
E not psi.
So it happens to be if
you get an equality,
you have found a ground
state Heigen function.
Now, as to why this is important in
practice and in chemistry in particular,
I don't think we're going to cover this
topic in any detail on this course,
but if you Google or go to Wikipedia and
look at
the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation.
You'll see there's this general argument,
electrons move much faster than nuclei.
And so, in a complex material system,
the nuclei are moving slowly, and
the electrons are able to adjust,
essentially instantaneously
to most of the nuclei.
So electrons are sort of the glue
that holds materials together.
So if you can minimize the total
energy of the system for
fixed internuclear coordinates as
a function of the electron wave functions,
then you typically get a very good
representation of the material structure.
And this task was made conceptually
practically much easier by Walter Kohn and
his collaborators,
who got the Noble Prize in chemistry for
the development density-functional theory.
Which is now sort of one of
the practical theoretical underpinnings
upon which a Gaussian trial
approximation is used.
So, just to summarize, these things are
very useful for a lot of applications, and
you're going to make an application of
it in one of the homework problems.